[= AutoGen5 template  -*- Mode: texi -*-

texi

##  Documentation template
##
## Author:            Bruce Korb <bkorb@gnu.org>
##
##  This file is part of Complexity.
##  Complexity Copyright (c) 2011, 2014 by Bruce Korb - all rights reserved
##
##  Complexity is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
##  under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
##  Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
##  (at your option) any later version.
##
##  Complexity is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
##  WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
##  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
##  See the GNU General Public License for more details.
##
##  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
##  with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=]
\input texinfo
@ignore
\internalpagesizes{46\baselineskip}{6in}{-.25in}{-.25in}{\bindingoffset}{36pt}%
@end ignore
@c %**start of header
@setfilename complexity.info
@settitle [= package =] - [= prog-title =]
@setchapternewpage off
@syncodeindex pg cp
@c %**end of header
@copying
This manual is for Complexity version [=

(define texi-escape-encode (lambda (in-str)
   (string-substitute in-str
      '("@"   "{"   "}")
      '("@@"  "@{"  "@}")
)  ))

(make-tmp-dir)

(define ver-update
   (shellf "UPDATED=`date '+%%B %%Y'` ; VERSION='%s'
      echo ${VERSION}, updated ${UPDATED}" (get "version")) )

ver-update =].

Copyright @copyright{} [= copyright.date =] by Bruce Korb.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
@end quotation
@end copying

@ignore
[=(set-writable) (dne "")=]
@end ignore

@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* Complexity: ([=prog-name=]).         [= prog-title =].
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Complexity - [= prog-title =]
@subtitle For version [=(. ver-update)=]
@author Bruce Korb
@author @email{[= (texi-escape-encode "bkorb@gnu.org") =]}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Complexity copyright @copyright{} [= copyright.date =] Bruce Korb

@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex

@node Top, Introduction, , (dir)
@top [= prog-title =]
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up

This file documents Complexity version [= version =].  It is a tool designed
for analyzing the complexity of ``C'' program functions.  It is very similar
to the McCabe scoring, but addresses several issues not considered in that
scoring scheme.

This edition documents version [=(. ver-update)=]

@menu
* Introduction::            Introduction
* Complexity Computation::  Complexity Computation
* Example Output::          Example Output
* complexity Invocation::   Invoking complexity
* Copying This Manual::     Copying This Manual
* Concept Index::           General index
@end menu

@end ifnottex

@include intro.texi
@include compute.texi

@page
@node    Example Output
@chapter Example Output
@cindex  Example Output

This is a self-referential example. This output was obtained by
going into the complexity source directory and running the command:
@example
[=`
src=\`cd ${top_srcdir}/src && pwd\`
bld=\`cd ${top_builddir}/src && pwd\`
cmd='complexity --histogram --score --thresh=3'
echo "$cmd *.c"
`=]
@end example

The @code{--threshold} is set to three because all of the functions
score below the default threshold of 30.  It is not zero because
there are too many trivial (0, 1 or 2) functions for a short example.

@noindent
This results in:

@example
[=`
cd ${src}
test -f opts.c || ln -s ${bld}/opts.c
eval ${bld}/${cmd} *.c | sed 's/\\(.\\{66\\}\\).*/\\1/'
test -L opts.c && rm opts.c
`=]
@end example
@page
@include invoke-complexity.texi
@page
@node Copying This Manual
@appendix Copying This Manual

You may copy this manual under the terms of the FDL
(@url{http://gnu.org/licenses/fdl.texi,the GNU Free Documentation License}).

@cindex FDL, GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl.texi

@page
@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp
@bye
