\input texinfo
@ignore
\internalpagesizes{46\baselineskip}{6in}{-.25in}{-.25in}{\bindingoffset}{36pt}%

This file is part of gnu-pw-mgr.
Copyright (C) 2013-2020 Bruce Korb, all rights reserved.
This is free software. It is licensed for use, modification and
redistribution under the terms of the GNU General Public License,
version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>

gnu-pw-mgr is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

gnu-pw-mgr is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
See the GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@end ignore
@c %**start of header
@include version.texi
@include set-flags.texi

@setfilename complexity.info
@settitle @value{PKG-TITLE}
@setchapternewpage off
@syncodeindex pg cp
@c %**end of header
@copying
This manual is for Complexity version @value{VERSION}, updated @value{UPDATED-MONTH}.

Copyright @copyright{} @value{CRIGHT} by Bruce Korb.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* Complexity: (@value{PROGRAM}).         @value{TITLE}.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Complexity - @value{TITLE}
@subtitle For version @value{VERSION}, updated @value{UPDATED-MONTH}
@author Bruce Korb
@author @email{@value{EMAIL}}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Complexity copyright @copyright{} @value{CRIGHT} Bruce Korb

@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex

@node Top, Introduction, , (dir)
@top @value{TITLE}
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up

This file documents Complexity version @value{VERSION}.  It is a tool designed
for analyzing the complexity of ``C'' program functions.  It is very similar
to the McCabe scoring, but addresses several issues not considered in that
scoring scheme.

This edition documents version @value{VERSION}, updated @value{UPDATED-MONTH}

@menu
* Introduction::            Introduction
* Complexity Computation::  Complexity Computation
* Example Output::          Example Output
* complexity Invocation::   Invoking complexity
* Copying This Manual::     Copying This Manual
* Concept Index::           General index
@end menu

@end ifnottex

@include intro.texi
@include compute.texi
@include example.texi

@page
@include invoke-complexity.texi
@page
@node Copying This Manual
@appendix Copying This Manual

You may copy this manual under the terms of the FDL
(@url{http://gnu.org/licenses/fdl.texi,the GNU Free Documentation License}).

@cindex FDL, GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl.texi

@page
@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp
@bye
